Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we're starting a new chapter.
Now we're still within the three chapter plug in development section, but now our focus is going to
be on JavaScript in particular.
I want to show you how we can use JavaScript to create new custom block types.
Let's jump right into the action and let me explain.
So if I begin to edit one of my posts.
Right, the screen is the modern block, Ed, and we know that by default, WordPress ships with a few
basic block types.
Each one of these is a paragraph block.
I can try to insert a new block that perhaps is an image or headline gallery list quote.
However, what if we as a developer want to create our own brand new completely custom block type and
then we want to share it with the world as a plugin?
Well, in order to do that, we need to dig into JavaScript, because as you might have guessed, these
block types are fairly interactive in real time.
You are changing the text or choosing different options and customizing them.
And in order to have things happen in real time like that, we need to use JavaScript.
So in this chapter, we're going to use JavaScript and learn a little bit about the framework called
REACT in order to build our own custom block types.
Right.
So our goal is when you try to insert a new block, we want a brand new type that we ourselves created.
So without further ado, right now, let's go create a new empty plugin folder and begin moving forward
together.
So do this with me in your WordPress installation, look for the WP content folder and then go into
the plugins folder.
And then we just want to create a brand new empty folder.
Right.
We're creating a new plugin together so you can name the new folder, whatever you want.
Try to name it something unique.
So a name that no other plugin has ever used before.
Several lessons from now.
Once we're actually up and running, we're going to start building a multiple choice quiz type of block
type.
So I'm going to name my new folder.
Are you paying attention?
Okay, but you can choose whatever name you want.
Then just go ahead and open up your new folder in your text editor.
Inside our folder, let's create a new JavaScript file.
So new file.
This will just be a quick test to see how things work.
So why don't we name the file test J.S. inside the file just so we can make sure that it's actually
loading?
Let's begin with an annoying alert pop up to just call the alert function and let's say hello from our
new JS file.
Let's give that a save.
And now, even though most of our work in this chapter is going to be in JavaScript, we still need
to use P to register a new plug in and then tell WordPress to load our JavaScript file when you're on
the Post editor screen.
So in our new folder, let's create a PDF file, a new file, let's name it, indexed dot http to save
a bit of time in our new file.
I'm just going to paste in my clipboard.
You can either pause the video and type this out or really I'm just recycling the code from our previous
plugin.
So we're entering into the generic plugin attributes, write the name, the description, the version,
the author, and then this line of code that prevents people from triggering our code by visiting the
euro for this file.
OK, with this boilerplate code out of the way, let's go ahead and create a class.
And then once we have our class up and running, we just want to in queue or load our JavaScript file.
So let's make up a new class class and then we can make up a name, I'll call it.
Are you paying attention?
No parentheses, just curly brackets.
Below this, let's create a new instance of our class.
So let's make up a variable name, dollar sign.
Let's call it maybe just lowercase.
Are you paying attention and set that to equal a new instance of our class?
Are you paying attention parentheses to actually use it or call it and then end with a semicolon?
Now in our class, let's create the constructor function.
So that's just function, underscore, underscore, construct, parentheses, curly brackets.
Now giving back to the actual task at hand, we just want to tell WordPress to load our JavaScript file
when you're on the block ed screen.
So inside the construct function we want to add an action.
So add action semicolon.
We give it to arguments.
The action hook name that we're interested in is on cue, which is a very easy word to misspell.
But on Q Block Ed assets, the second argument is a function that we want to run.
Let's use the array callable syntax.
So the first argument is dollar sign this, then we make up a method name.
How about admin assets?
OK, then let's go create a method with this name, so still in our class, but just below the construct
function will say function.
We scroll down a bit.
Function, admin assets, parentheses, curly brackets, and then we're just going to on cue a JavaScript
file.
So we've already seen this back during the theme development chapters, but it's a function that WordPress
offers to us named WP on Q script Semicolon.
We're going to give it three arguments for now.
So ABC, the first argument is just a name that we're sort of giving this JavaScript file, right?
Sort of a short name or variable names of WordPress can identify it.
You can make up anything you want.
I'll call it our new block type.
The second argument is just a neutral that points towards our JavaScript file.
So let's use the word press function called plug in WRAL parentheses to call it inside there.
Let's use the constant of underscore, underscore, phial, underscore, underscore.
So this will give us the Eurail of the folder that the current file is in.
And then after that, so after the parentheses, but before the comma, we're going to concatenate on
a string of text and just point towards our JavaScript file.
So we named it test.
Yes, OK.
The third argument is a list of dependencies, so let's give this an array.
And for now, the only thing we really, truly need to load is something called.
So a string of text WP dash blocks.
Now, don't worry, in a few minutes we will learn what WP blocks is.
So we'll learn why we're loading it here as a dependency and actually how to begin leveraging and using
it.
But for now, why don't we go ahead and save this and test it out?
So back in WordPress, the first thing we need to do is go activate our new plugin.
So back on the generic admin dashboard screen in the sidebar, let's Gondar plug ins.
Let's find the new one that we just created.
So remember, I named mine.
Are you paying attention, Cui's?
So just go ahead and activate your plugin, OK?
And what we want to do now is test to make sure that the editors screen is loading our JavaScript file.
So if we just go into posts and begin editing a post.
Perfect, we see that annoying alert pop up hello from our new JavaScript file, this is great.
So that means our own custom JavaScript file is loading on this screen from here.
It's very easy to register a new custom block type.
So let's just write a little bit of JavaScript code together.
So back in our test JS file, let's get rid of the annoying alert pop up and instead let's say WP dot.
Oops.
Well if you're using voice code as your text editor like I am, you might have just got this exact same
annoying feature.
So when I typed WP and then attempted to type DOT, it just sort of auto filled that in for me.
Now this is not what I want.
So what you can do is type WP and then hit the escape key and now I can type dot dot blocks, dot register,
block type.
And this is a method.
So we want to call it before we give it any arguments, let's first talk about where this is coming
from.
So WordPress itself is going to add something called WP to the browsers global scope.
Inside that object, there's going to be something called blocks and inside that there's something called
register block type.
So remember, back in our file when we listed WP dash blocks as a dependency?
Well, this is why, because we want to make sure that it has already been loaded before WordPress loads
our JavaScript file.
So that way we have no problems just accessing this from the global scope.
So we're just using a function that WordPress gives to us and now we want to give it to arguments.
So Akama, be the first argument is the short name or variable name for our block type.
So instead of a let's give it quotes and we actually want to begin with a namespace that is unique to
our plugin.
So why don't we call it our plug in slash and now you get to the actual short name for our block type,
I'll call it.
Are you paying attention?
OK, the second argument is a configuration object, so that just means we're going to give it curly
brackets for a object in JavaScript inside the curly brackets we can dropdown and now we're just going
to spell out a few properties.
So we need to use very precise or exact property names that WordPress knows to look for.
The first one will be title.
So title Colon.
We give it a string of text.
Now, this is what people will actually see.
So we are free to have spaces and uppercase letters.
So let's say, are you paying attention?
Questionmark after that.
Let's have a comma.
We want another property.
Let's call it icon.
And for now we can just use a dash Hakone.
So let's just say smiley comma.
Let's have another property called category.
Let's just place it in the common category.
There's also layout, I believe there's one called typography or text.
For now, let's just go with common.
OK, now we want to more properties of comma.
We want property named.
Edit now for its value.
Instead of giving it a string of text, we want to give it a function, a JavaScript function.
So now we will learn more about code organization later on.
But for now, let's just give it an anonymous or inline function.
You could even give it an S6 Arrow function if you wanted to.
But I'll just say function parentheses, curly brackets.
We will circle back to the body of the function in just a moment.
But after this closing curly bracket, let's have a comma and we want our configuration object to have
one more property named Save Colon.
And again, for its value, this should be a function.
So function parentheses curly brackets.
Now let's talk a little bit about what the edit and save functions are used for.
The edit function controls what you'll see in the admin post editor screen, whereas the save function
controls what the actual public will see in your content.
So in both functions will want to return a value, but we can't just return a traditional string of
text.
Instead, WordPress has its own way of describing and rendering HTML through JavaScript.
And so we need to do things the way that WordPress is expecting us to.
Let me explain what I mean.
So in the edit function, what we want to do is return something and what do we want to return?
Well, we're going to start out by looking in the global or window scope of JavaScript for something
called WP dot element, dot create element, which is a method, so parentheses to call it.
So we're just leveraging this function that WordPress adds.
The global scope of the browser, and this is the official WordPress way of creating an HTML element
from within JavaScript, so within these parentheses we're going to give it three arguments.
So you could say a comma be comma C.
The first argument is the type of HTML element you want to create.
So a string of text, maybe this would be a P four paragraph element or an unordered list or a list
item or heading level one.
Just for a quick example, why don't we add a heading level three?
OK, the second argument is any attributes or properties that describe this element.
So, for example, if you wanted to give it an HTML class or if you wanted to give it an inline style
attribute, for now, we're just going to leave that blank.
So we'll just give it a value of null.
And then the third argument is the children are content for this element.
So this is where we would include the actual text that would live inside the heading level three.
So let's say quotes.
Hello, this is from the admin ed screen.
OK, now, in terms of our safe function, let's just use this exact same code, but slightly edited
it, so I'm not going to copy this entire line into my clipboard, paste it into the save function only.
Let's change the third argument to instead say this is the front end.
OK, and just to make the difference crystal clear, you could even change the element to a heading
level one.
Let's go ahead and save this.
Now, technically, WordPress will always load WP element on the Post editor screen.
That's a very safe bet.
However, it is a best practice to describe and tell WordPress what our plugin needs or what it depends
on.
So if we wanted to follow a best practice and really play it safe, we could go back into our file.
And when we're loading our JavaScript file, remember our array of dependencies, you could go ahead
and say Kharma quotes WP dash element just to be 100 percent sure that that will already be loaded and
exist before WordPress loads our file.
So let's save that and give it a test.
So on the Post editor screen, be sure to reload or refresh.
OK, now imagine in between these two paragraphs, I want to insert a new block, so cool, you should
see it as the very first option.
Are you paying attention?
If you don't see it, you could also always use the search menu to search for.
Either way, let's just click it to actually inserted into our post.
Cool there.
Is that heading level three.
Hello, this is from the admin ed screen.
Now, if we actually click save or update and then view this blog post on the front end of our website,
if we scroll down a little bit there we see the heading level one.
This is the front end now right away.
The first thing I want to do is demystify what's going on here on the front end.
What I mean by that is WordPress is absolutely not loading JavaScript right here on the front end now.
Yes, on the admin screen, WordPress is actually calling our JavaScript function to generate this element
that we see on the edit screen.
But once you actually click update or save, well, whatever our save method returns, that's just going
to get saved into the database as a traditional piece of text.
So if you open up admin error or look at your database and go into the posts table and then click select
data, if I go to the very last page and click edit on my most recent post and then look for the post
content field so you can see.
Let me zoom in a little bit.
You can see WP Colon paragraph.
That's the in default block type that WordPress gives to us for just a standard paragraph.
But if we scroll down a little bit.
Here we can see WP Colen, our plug ins.
Are you paying attention and literally the only thing getting saved into the database is just a simple
piece of text.
So as far as our front end is concerned, this has nothing to do with JavaScript.
Now, don't worry.
Later in this chapter, we will learn how to include JavaScript on the front end of our website.
But I think it's important to see this as early as possible.
Ultimately, WordPress is just going to take whatever value our save method returns, and that's just
getting added into the database like this.
Now let's get back on track and talk about where we go from here.
So back on the edit screen, we don't actually want the editor content to just be a heading level three
with hard coded text.
Instead, we would want this to be dynamic and interactive, someplace where the user can type into
a field or customize an option.
However, in order to do that, we would need to be able to write fairly complex HTML or at least HTML.
That's more complex than a single element with a single piece of content or children.
And even though this create element method is the way that WordPress creates HTML from within JavaScript,
no one or practically no one actually directly leverages it like this.
Instead, in the real world, there's a syntax called JS X that looks almost identical to HTML and it
makes it very easy to spell out complex HTML interfaces from within JavaScript right here now is amazing.
However, in order to use it, it does require a little bit of configuration or installation of development
workflow tools on your computer.
Now, while that can typically be complex or difficult to set up.
Luckily for us, the WordPress team has created an official JavaScript package called WordPress Scripts
that makes the entire process a hundred and fifty million percent easier and simpler.
So in our very next lesson, we're going to learn how to use JSM here so that we can easily and elegantly
spell out complex HTML interfaces.
Let's keep the momentum rolling and I'll see you then.